ADR decisions for GUI (#769)
ScilifelabDataCentre/dds_cli: docs/architecture/decisions/0003-omit-specific-component-tests.md

# 3. Omit Specific Component Tests

Date: 2025-08-04

## Status

Accepted

## Context

The pattern for UI components in the DDS GUI is to implement the Textual componet class. This is to ensure uniformity over the application with consitent component styling and functionallity.
Mostly, the UI components only feature styling (for example buttons and containers), but some feature more complex funtionallity (for example modals and tree views). For the simpler UI componetns, no additionalal tests are needed as they are covered by the frameworks testsing. For the more complex components with added logic, these need additional testing.

There are two options for the testing of these components:

1. Test the UI components more thurughly through integration test corresponding to the different userflows, or
2. Test the UI components in the integration tests **AND** with designated component tests.

Currenly, the complex components are not resued between pages. The test converage would be the same in both alternatives.

> 

Reviewer: I don't exactly know how the component tests would look, but I agree that there would probably be a bit of code duplication. I think we should add some of your reply in the comment to the doc. 

```suggestion
The following is an example of one of the "simpler" components. In this case the component only changes some of the styling of the parent class `Button` (from Textual) and therefore implementing a custom test for the functionality of the `DDSButton` would not give us anything. 

<code>
class DDSButton(Button):
    """Regular button widget with uppercase title.
    Args:
        label: The label to be displayed on the button.
    """

    def __init__(self, label: str, *args: Any, **kwargs: Any) -> None:
        super().__init__(label.upper(), *args, **kwargs)

    DEFAULT_CSS = """
    DDSButton {
        padding: 0 2 0 2;
    }
    DDSButton.wide {
        width: 100%;
    }
    """
</code>

For the more complex components, such as `DDSTreeView`, where the goal is to display the project contents in a "tree view" (thus something specifically implemented by us), it might make more sense to add component tests. It is however only planned to be used in one place at the moment, so its not an actual "reusable component", it is only treated as such for code readability and consistency. Adding "strict" component tests and integration tests would in this case produce partly duplicate test code. 
```

Reviewer: @ebbaoliveberg What do you think?

Reviewer: Great! I'll tag the team as well to see what they think 
@valyo @rv0lt

## Decision

The component specific test will be omitted.

## Consequences

> As the complex components are not resued between pages at the moment, duplicate testing schemas would not increase the readability of the test coverage of the componet. If the complex components are used in more than one page, we should bring this point up for discussion and reevaluate oour decision.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the complex components are not reused between pages at the moment, duplicate testing schemas would not increase the readability of the test coverage of the component. If the complex components are used in more than one page, we should bring this point up for discussion and reevaluate our decision.
```
